\addchap{\scshape preface}
\setcounter{fopagecnt}{2}

\drop The life story of Joan of Arc, as told in this volume, closely follows
the historical facts as well as the official records bearing upon her
trial and burning for “heresy, relapse, apostasy, and idolatry.” It
naturally divides into two parts. First, the simple pastoral life of the
shepherd maiden of Domremy, which is charmingly portrayed; the visions
of her favorite saints; the heavenly voices which commissioned her to
raise the English siege of Orleans and crown the Dauphin; her touching
farewell to her home; and, secondly, the part she played as the Maid of
Orleans in the stirring events of the field; the victories which she
achieved over the English and their Burgundian allies; the raising of
the siege; the coronation of the ungrateful Dauphin at Rheims; her fatal
mistake in remaining in his service after her mission was accomplished;
her capture at Compiègne; her infamous sale to the English by Burgundy;
her more infamous trial by the corrupt and execrable Cauchon; and her
cruel martyrdom at the stake. Another story, the abduction of Marie of
Chafleur, her rescue by Jean Renault, and their final happiness, is
closely interwoven with the movement of the main story, and serves to
lighten up the closing chapters. This episode is pure romance of an
exciting nature; but the life of the Maid of Orleans is a remarkably
faithful historical picture, which is all the more vivid because the
characters are real. In this respect it resembles nearly all the volumes
in the numerous German “libraries for youth.” They are stories of real
lives, concisely, charmingly, and honestly told, and adhere so closely
to fact that the reader forms something like an intimate personal
acquaintance with the characters they introduce.

\begin{flushright}
\textsc{G. P. U.}
\end{flushright}

\begin{flushright}
\textit{Chicago, 1904.}
\end{flushright}
